# honours_project: MODELLING THE WORLD ACCORDING TO A BIRD: COMPARING METHODS TO MEASURE OPERATIVE TEMPERATURE TO ASSESS THEIR BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE
Honours student: Hannah Glanvill
Supervisors: A/Prof Susan Cunningham and Dr Shannon Conradie

Abstract: 
Global warming affects climate at both a macro and micro scale, although research has predominantly focused on macroclimate warming. Yet microclimate is more informative than macroclimatic variables when modelling species responses to climate change. Various techniques exist to measure microclimates relevant to organisms, including measuring operative temperature (T(e)–thermal load experienced by an organism). One can empirically measure T(e) using taxidermic mounts fitted with temperature loggers which is considered the most accurate technique. Alternatively, 3D printed models or blackbulb operative temperature loggers (‘blackbulbs’) can be used to empirically measure T(e) or biophysical models can be used to predict T(e) based on the mathematical first principles of heat exchange. I aimed to assess the Te measuring methods’ biological relevance by (1) comparing empirical T(e) measures (taxidermic mounts versus blackbulbs, and taxidermic mount versus 3D-printed model) and (2) comparing the biophysical model (NicheMapR) T(e) predictions to blackbulb empirical T(e) measurements. I used empirically collected T(e) measurements from two datasets, a ‘historical’ dataset from 2015 (southern yellow-billed hornbills (Tockus leucomelas) taxidermic mounts and blackbulbs in the Kalahari Desert region) and a ‘novel’ dataset from 2024 (rufous-cheeked nightjar (Caprimulgus rufigena) taxidermic mount and 3D-printed model, a red lark (Calendulauda burra) taxidermic mount, and blackbulbs in Cape Town). 

References: 
BAKKEN, G. S. 1976. A heat transfer analysis of animals: unifying concepts and the application of metabolism chamber data to field ecology. Journal of theoretical Biology, 60, 337-384.
BAKKEN, G. S. 1980. The use of standard operative temperature in the study of the thermal energetics of birds. Physiological Zoology, 53, 108-119.
KEARNEY, M., SHINE, R. & PORTER, W. P. 2009. The potential for behavioral thermoregulation to buffer “cold-blooded” animals against climate warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 3835-3840.
KEARNEY, M. R., BRISCOE, N. J., MATHEWSON, P. D. & PORTER, W. P. 2021. NicheMapR–an R package for biophysical modelling: the endotherm model. Ecography, 44, 1595-1605.
KEARNEY, M. R., GILLINGHAM, P. K., BRAMER, I., DUFFY, J. P. & MACLEAN, I. M. 2020. A method for computing hourly, historical, terrain‐corrected microclimate anywhere on earth. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 11, 38-43.
KEARNEY, M. R. & PORTER, W. P. 2017. NicheMapR–an R package for biophysical modelling: the microclimate model. Ecography, 40, 664-674.
KEARNEY, M. R. & PORTER, W. P. 2020. NicheMapR–an R package for biophysical modelling: the ectotherm and dynamic energy budget models. Ecography, 43, 85-96.
VAN DE VEN, T. M., MCKECHNIE, A. E. & CUNNINGHAM, S. 2019. The costs of keeping cool: behavioural trade-offs between foraging and thermoregulation are associated with significant mass losses in an arid-zone bird. Oecologia, 191, 205-215.
